<!--- auto generated by `bin/console docs:generate-scripts-reference` in the shopware project, don't edit this file manually -->
# Product script services reference

## [`Shopware\Core\Content\Product\Hook\Pricing\PriceCollectionFacade`](https://github.com/shopware/platform/blob/trunk/src/Core/Content/Product/Hook/Pricing/PriceCollectionFacade.php) {#pricecollectionfacade}

The PriceCollectionFacade is a wrapper around the calculated price collection of a product. It allows to manipulate the quantity
prices by resetting or changing the price collection.

### reset()

* The `reset()` functions allows to reset the complete price collection.

    
### change()

* The `change()` function allows a complete overwrite of the product quantity prices

    
* **Arguments:**
    * *`array`* **changes**: 
* **Examples:**
    * Overwrite the product prices with a new quantity price graduation

        ```twig
        {% do debug.dump(product.calculatedPrice.unit, 'discount') %}
		
		{% do product.calculatedPrice.surcharge(10) %}
		
		{% do debug.dump(product.calculatedPrice.unit, 'surcharge') %}
        ```

### count()

* The `count()` function returns the number of prices which are stored inside this collection.

    
* **Returns** `int`

    Returns the number of prices which are stored inside this collection
_________
## [`Shopware\Core\Content\Product\Hook\Pricing\ProductProxy`](https://github.com/shopware/platform/blob/trunk/src/Core/Content/Product/Hook/Pricing/ProductProxy.php) {#productproxy}

The `ProductProxy` is a wrapper for the `SalesChannelProductEntity`. It provides access to all properties of the product,
but also wraps some data into helper facade classes like `PriceFacade` or `PriceCollectionFacade`.

### __get()

* The `__get()` function allows access to all properties of the [SalesChannelProductEntity](https://github.com/shopware/platform/blob/trunk/src/Core/Content/Product/SalesChannel/SalesChannelProductEntity.php)

    
* **Returns** `mixed` | `null`

    Returns the value of the property. The value is `mixed` due to the fact that all properties are accessed via `__get()`
* **Arguments:**
    * *`string`* **name**: Name of the property to access
* **Examples:**
    * Access the product properties

        ```twig
        { to: 30, price: services.price.create({ 'default': { 'gross': 10, 'net': 10} }) },
		    { to: null, price: services.price.create({ 'default': { 'gross': 5, 'net': 5} }) },
		]) %}
        ```

### calculatedCheapestPrice()

* The `calculatedCheapestPrice` property returns the cheapest price of the product. The price object will
be wrapped into a `PriceFacade` object which allows to manipulate the price.

    
* **Returns** [`Shopware\Core\Checkout\Cart\Facade\PriceFacade`](./cart-manipulation-script-services-reference.md#pricefacade) | `null`

    Returns a `PriceFacade` if the product has a calculated cheapest price, otherwise `null`
### calculatedPrice()

* The `calculatedPrice` property returns the price of the product. The price object will
be wrapped into a `PriceFacade` object which allows to manipulate the price.

    
* **Returns** [`Shopware\Core\Checkout\Cart\Facade\PriceFacade`](./cart-manipulation-script-services-reference.md#pricefacade) | `null`

    Returns a `PriceFacade` if the product has a price, otherwise `null`
### calculatedPrices()

* The `calculatedPrices` property returns the price of the product. The price object will
be wrapped into a `PriceCollectionFacade` object which allows to manipulate the collection.

    
* **Returns** [`Shopware\Core\Content\Product\Hook\Pricing\PriceCollectionFacade`](./product-script-services-reference.md#pricecollectionfacade) | `null`

    Returns a `PriceCollectionFacade` if the product has graduated prices, otherwise `null`
_________
